There are several reasons for which doing language documentation in a refugee camp as diverse as Minawao poses unprecedented challenges to the researchers.
- Documentary record must be representative of the diversity of genres and of linguistic practices that are observed in the speaker community's language ecology --> camp environment is culturally empoverished and traditional practices may be felt as inopportune tin the context of a forcedly cohabitative setting (fear of being ridiculed by institutions and other refugee groups). While communities rarely agree unanimously on what exactly their documentation should look like, in camp settings it can happen that there is not enough authority on the part of any subgroups that compose it for a decision to be made. (see also point below)
- Getting to know what the community wants can be more difficult than in ancestral and in diasporic settings. Community hierarchies may be extremely complicated by the existence of multiple layers of duties, roles, and responsibilities --> traditional roles, early institution-fostered roles, later institution-based reorganizations creating parallel and sometimes conflictual structures.
- Camp residents can have a lot of free time, which is good. At the same time, they are also highly volatile since, by not having properties besides their house, they are subject to the emergency of situations of sudden need that would require them to disappear without any advance notice.
- The main "problem" caused by camp residents having more free time is that they might be much more attentive and vigil on the documentary project, which requires documenters to be more sensitive than is usually the case for what concerns the community's accessibility to project output.

Normally, the output of a language documentation project is stored in an online archive whose first mission, like in the case of ELAR, is to guarantee long-term preservation. User-friendliness, while not completely ourside of the picture, is not a core value of such archives and, as a result, basic functionalities like searching content and accessing it in multiple formats depending on one's internet connectivity are usually not available or work in ways that are very different than those most people are accustomed to (e.g. Youtube).
This is tolerated by a community when there is limited interest in the project output, or when it is satisfied of the project's results otherwise (e.g. it has produced a dictionary that the community is using). In my experience, this is tolerated mostly because the community consciously decides to keep the relationship with the outsider ongoing, in the hope that in the long run this will eventually yield something they will benefit from. None of these are options in a context like a refugee camp.
A refugee camp is an artificial social organization where multiple groups, with their own original internal organization and hierarchies, are put together (often ignoring that residential patterns may favor or disfavor community-building) and under the control of a plethora of institutions, each taking the lead on a given domain of existence. If UNHCR remains the general overseer of the camp, entities like the WFP and the Danish Refugee Council are directly involved in food distribution, the Cameroonian Government directly oversees education and security, whereas constructions and health are more of a joint effort coordinated by a number of governative and non-governative organizations. On top of that, the camp is interspersed with dozens of Christian churches of different confessions, and dozens of mosques with largely independent preachers. If one considers that each of these actors has its own internal hierarchy, its own ways to make and implement decisions, its own agenda, and its own funding constraints, and if one recalls that camp residents are directly involved in all these activities at various levels of responsibility, then it will become apparent that refugee camps are like jungles of more or less mutually correlated institutional plans of action, hierarchies. The community living in such a jungle risks to be torn apart by the fact that individual members may end up working for different organizations, with partially different agendas, but with the same feeling that they have become more important than other members—though not through any of the traditional means of doing that, nor in most cases because of a transparent selection process. This may engender the creation of small-scale "centers of power", i.e. antagonist people (mostly men) creating ego-centered clientelar webs they are patrons of.
Where is the problem for a project like ours? The problem lies in the fact that, in such a potential fragmentation, it would be a mistake to take for granted that one given "community board" is actually representative of or has actual authority over the whole community.

Refugee camp residents are in a situation of lack not just of resources, but of constraints. They are desperately disowned, there are no facilitations for them to practice their culture, even residentially, members of the same community usually live scattered in different sectors of the camp. Institutional and non-governmental actors try to reduce this generalized condition of otherwise extreme vulnerability. They do that mostly through a plethora of projects, each implying meetings, creation of boards, roles, goals. A camp is like an ever-evolving organism that tries to improve itself by endless processes of trial-and-error within itself. Projects start and finish, external collaborators arrive and go away, places are built and used and then abandoned or repurposed. In such an admittedly confusing life, and with the root causes of their displacement left unaddressed, refugees remain refugees and, while some of them learn new skills, the majority sees no real change in their everyday life. It is only rarely the case that the output of all those projects is visible to everyone, or remain accessible after the end of the project. On the long run, this erodes trust in the external world, hope in the future especially among the younger generations, and basically contributes to paving the road for phenomena like Boko Haram to continue to emerge—because BH is a revolutionary movement that would not have emerged if there had been social justice in Nigeria.



Doing language documentation is popularly imagined as a kind of field-based research where the researcher needs to travel to remote areas of the world and work with communities who still preserve a great deal of their (premodern) culture. Even when one is able to deconstruct this idyllic romantic view, one idea that will be still difficult to untie is that of a community living in the ancestral homeland. Working with diasporic communities breaks all this down